http://www.drewconway.com/zia/?p=1614

Must-Have R Packages for Social Scientists
By Drew Conway, on December 11th, 2009

After recently having to think critically about the value of various R
packages for social science research, I realized that others might find
value in a post on “must-have” R packages for social scientists. After
the immensely popular post on this topic for Python packages a follow-up
seemed appropraite. If you conduct social science research but are
desperately clinging onto your SAS, SPSS or Matlab licenses; waiting for
someone to convince you of R’s value, please allow me to be the first
to try.

R is a functional programming language that allows for seamless data
exploration, manipulation, analysis and visualization. The community
using and supporting the language has exploded over the last several
years, which has lead to the development of several immensely useful
packages, many of which have direct application in the social sciences.
Below are the R packages I use on a weekly/daily/monthly basis (in no
particular order) and highly recommend to any R users; new or old.

   1.
      Zelig

      Put simply, Zelig is a one-stop statistical shop for nearly all
regression model specifications. Using a uniform syntax across model
types, and several extremely useful plotting functions, the package’s
autor Gary King (Political Science and Statistics at Harvard University)
calls Zelig “everyone’s statistical software,” which is a very
accurate description. if there is one R package that every social
scientist should have it is Zelig!

      Download Zelig
   2.
      ggplot2

      One of the advantages of R as a functional language is it contains
a set of convenient base functions for plotting data. While useful when
exploring a dataset, they are–for lack of a better word–ugly, and this
is where ggplot2 comes in. Using the Grammar of Graphics manifesto as a
guide, creator Hadley Wickham designed ggplot2 to “take the good parts
of base and lattice graphics and none of the bad parts,” and he
succeed. This is the premier R package for conveying your analysis
visually.

      Download ggplot2
   3.
      Statnet/igraph

      I have combined the two competing network analysis packages in R
into a single bullet because each has its strengths and weaknesses, and
as such there is value in leaning and using both. The igraph package
approaches network analysis from the mathematics/physics/graph theoretic
perspective, including several advanced metrics and random graph models.
In contrast, Statnet was primarily designed for social science, and its
primary advantage is the inclusion of a series of functions for
estimating and testing ERGM/p* graph models.

      Download igraph
      Download Statnet
   4.
      plyr

      Also brought to you by R guru Hadley Wickham, the plyr package
assist reachers in the least glamorous aspect of their work—data
manipulation and cleaning. One of R’s great advantages is its ability t
handle very large datasets, and plyr is there to help you break these
large data problems into smaller and more manageable pieces.

      Download plyr
   5.
      Amelia II

      Also developed by Gary Kind, Amelia II contains a sets of
algorithms for multiple imputation of missing data across a wide range
of data types, such as survey, time series and cross sectional. As
missing data problems are ubiquitous in social science research the
functions contained in this package provide a powerful solution to these
issues.

      Download Amelia II
   6.
      nlme

      This package is used to fit and compare Gaussian linear and
nonlinear mixed-effects models. For those examining complex time series
data with various correlation structures the nlme provides a number of
options for fits, tests and plotting.

      Download nlme
   7.
      SNOW/Rmpi

      Unlike newer version of Python, the current build of R does not
contain native functionality for distributing jobs across
high-performance computing clusters. The SNOW and Rmpi packages provide
this functionality, and are highly recommended to any researcher with
access to an HPC environment running R.

      Download SNOW
      Download Rmpi
   8.
      xtable/apsrtable

      Both of these packages convert R summary results into LaTeX/HTML
table format. The xtable package is a general solution, while the
apsrtable package, developed by fellow political science grad student
Michael Malecki, will output tables in the APSR format&mdas;for those of
you fortunate enough to need to use this format.

      Download xtable
      Download apsrtable
   9.
      plm

      Got panel data? If so, you need plm, which contains all of the
necessary model specifications and tests for fitting a panel data model;
including specifications for instrumental variable models.

      Download plm
  10.
      sqldf

      As I stated, R is great for dealing with large datasets; however,
occasionally you will encounter a dataset so large that it can grind R’
s base I/O functions to a halt. As the name suggests, the sqldf packages
overcomes this by allowing uses to perfrom SQL statements directly on R
data frames, greatly increasing efficiency.

      Download sqldf 

I hope that you will explore and use the packages above that you do not
already have familiarity with. To those who have never used R and/or
have an irrational phobia of the language, let this list provide the
appropriate motivation. Also, to those R experts out there, I welcome
any suggestions for more useful R packages for the social science
inclined!

